README.md, before:

# Nav. Switch Mount

![5-way Navigation Switch Mount](Images/nav-switch-mount.png)

This is a simple PCB for mounting through-hole 5-way navigation switches such as
the [ALPS SKQUCAA010]. It is intended for use in keyboard projects and provides
a way to both secure a nav. switch and easily wire it into a keyboard matrix.

This switch has been discontinued by ALPS, but equivalents can be obtained from
[Adafruit][ada-504] and various vendors on [AliExpress][ali-SKQ][^1].

<img src="Images/5-five-way-switches.jpg" width="250" title="5-way Navigation Switches">

This repository contains the [KiCad] PCB design files and [Gerber format] files
for PCB production. Zipped Gerber packages are included in the release assets.


[^1]: If no results are shown, try refreshing the page.


## Additional Components Required

 * 1 × [ALPS SKQUCAA010] (or equivalent) navigation switch
 * 5 × 1N4841 [SOD-123] SMD diodes


 ## Options

The current (v2) PCB is 22.9×13.2mm. The diodes can be mounted on either side of
the PCB. Connections to the board are via wires that align with MX switch centre
and alignment pins.

The first version of the PCB came in two variants:

 * **1-sided** — 24.3×13mm — the switch and diodes are all mounted on the top
    of the PCB.
 * **2-sided** — 22.3×12.6mm — the diodes are mounted on the opposite side of
    the PCB to the switch. Wire connections are via pads.

## Wiring

The switch and diodes are installed as marked. Diodes may be soldered on the
opposite side to the switch (positions D1—D5) or on the same side as the switch
(∆1—∆5) depending on preference. The PCB is wired into the [keyboard matrix] via
the holes on the underside. The *Row* hole/pad is the common pin for the switch
and should be connected to a row pin on the MCU. The other holes/pads should be
connected to columns, with the silkscreen near the connection point indicating
the direction (see notes below). The holes are specifically designed to line-up
with the centre and two alignment pins of an MX switch, allowing the wires to
easily run through to the back of the keyboard’s PCB. However, the best routing
will depend on the exact board being modified — in some cases it may be
desirable to run the wires between the plate and PCB.

It is recommended that masking tape is used to prevent solder from building up
on the upper side of the board (in a similar manner to when socketing an MCU)
and the wires will need to be soldered from the bottom side (i.e., from the
opposite direction from how a wire would normally be soldered).

### Notes

 * The markings on the silkscreen orient the diodes for **Column-to-Row** use.
   For a Row-to-Column matrix the diodes must be installed in the opposite
   direction.
 * The arrows point in the direction that the switch is actually pushed. This
   means that when viewed from the bottom the left and right arrows indicate
   right and left movement respectively.
 * The ‘•’ marking indicates the centre press action[^2].


[^2]: On the nav. switches I have used I have found the centre press to be both
      vague and twitchy and have left it unassigned on most layers.


## Mounting

### M2 Hardware

These PCBs are designed to be secured using M2 hardware. Two ~2.1mm holes will
need to be drilled through the keyboard’s plate (or, potentially, the keyboard’s
PCB, although this would need to be planned with great care!).

The mount points are in the same position relative to the centre of the PCB for
both variants.

### MX Adaptor

Alternatively, these PCBs can be used in conjunction with Kevin Eckert’s [Nav
Switch to MX Adapter][nav2mx]. The switch’s legs should be long enough to reach
past the bottom of the adaptor and through the mounting PCB. The switch’s legs
may need to be straightened for ease of soldering (be careful if doing this —
the fragility of these legs was one of the main prompts to create this board!).

For keyboards with a PCB, the adaptor can **only** be used top-mounted diodes
and the mounting board must be thinner than the usual 1.6mm to allow room for
the switch legs to be soldered[^3]. The legs will need to be trimmed back as
much as possible to avoid pressing on the keyboard PCB. There is not enough room
between a plate and a keyboard PCB for the adaptor and bottom-mounted diodes.

Careful consideration should be given to the order of assembly when using the
adaptor.


[^3]: At the time of writing 0.8mm PCBs seem to be available for no additional
      charge.


## Keycaps

Options for keycaps on navigation switches:

 * [Adafruit Black Rubber Joystick Nubbin Cap][ada-4697]
 * Kevin Eckert’s SA profile keycap for navigation switches is available
   alongside their [Nav Switch to MX Adapter][nav2mx]
 * If you don’t mind partially destroying a keycap, I have an [MX keycap to nav.
   switch adaptor][mx2nav] — **this is currently untested**



[ALPS SKQUCAA010]: https://tech.alpsalpine.com/e/products/detail/SKQUCAA010/
[KiCad]: https://www.kicad.org
[Gerber format]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerber_format
[ada-504]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/504
[ada-4697]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/4697
[ali-SKQ]: https://www.aliexpress.com/w/wholesale-SKQUCAA010.html?catId=0&SearchText=SKQUCAA010&spm=a2g0o.productlist.1000002.0
[SOD-123]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_Outline_Diode
[keyboard matrix]: https://www.pcbheaven.com/wikipages/How_Key_Matrices_Works/
[nav2mx]: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:3958026
[mx2nav]: https://www.tinkercad.com/things/3gL4wvWRLj1?sharecode=r8TKDKdgjJ2txvJRraO-QcmJA2kGXZVvP2sOEYxu-jg

Commit message:

Add print files and additional information for keycap adaptors

README.md, after:

# Nav. Switch Mount

![5-way Navigation Switch Mount](Images/nav-switch-mount.png)

This is a simple PCB for mounting through-hole 5-way navigation switches such as
the [ALPS SKQUCAA010]. It is intended for use in keyboard projects and provides
a way to both secure a nav. switch and easily wire it into a keyboard matrix.

This switch has been discontinued by ALPS, but equivalents can be obtained from
[Adafruit][ada-504] and various vendors on [AliExpress][ali-SKQ][^1].

<img src="Images/5-five-way-switches.jpg" width="250" title="5-way Navigation Switches">

This repository contains the [KiCad] PCB design files and [Gerber format] files
for PCB production. Zipped Gerber packages are included in the release assets.


[^1]: If no results are shown, try refreshing the page.


## Additional Components Required

 * 1 × [ALPS SKQUCAA010] (or equivalent) navigation switch
 * 5 × 1N4841 [SOD-123] SMD diodes


 ## Options

The current (v2) PCB is 22.9×13.2mm. The diodes can be mounted on either side of
the PCB. Connections to the board are via wires that align with MX switch centre
and alignment pins.

The first version of the PCB came in two variants:

 * **1-sided** — 24.3×13mm — the switch and diodes are all mounted on the top
    of the PCB.
 * **2-sided** — 22.3×12.6mm — the diodes are mounted on the opposite side of
    the PCB to the switch. Wire connections are via pads.

## Wiring

The switch and diodes are installed as marked. Diodes may be soldered on the
opposite side to the switch (positions D1—D5) or on the same side as the switch
(∆1—∆5) depending on preference. The PCB is wired into the [keyboard matrix] via
the holes on the underside. The *Row* hole/pad is the common pin for the switch
and should be connected to a row pin on the MCU. The other holes/pads should be
connected to columns, with the silkscreen near the connection point indicating
the direction (see notes below). The holes are specifically designed to line-up
with the centre and two alignment pins of an MX switch, allowing the wires to
easily run through to the back of the keyboard’s PCB. However, the best routing
will depend on the exact board being modified — in some cases it may be
desirable to run the wires between the plate and PCB.

It is recommended that masking tape is used to prevent solder from building up
on the upper side of the board (in a similar manner to when socketing an MCU)
and the wires will need to be soldered from the bottom side (i.e., from the
opposite direction from how a wire would normally be soldered).

### Notes

 * The markings on the silkscreen orient the diodes for **Column-to-Row** use.
   For a Row-to-Column matrix the diodes must be installed in the opposite
   direction.
 * The arrows point in the direction that the switch is actually pushed. This
   means that when viewed from the bottom the left and right arrows indicate
   right and left movement respectively.
 * The ‘•’ marking indicates the centre press action[^2].


[^2]: On the nav. switches I have used I have found the centre press to be both
      vague and twitchy and have left it unassigned on most layers.


## Mounting

### M2 Hardware

These PCBs are designed to be secured using M2 hardware. Two ~2.1mm holes will
need to be drilled through the keyboard’s plate (or, potentially, the keyboard’s
PCB, although this would need to be planned with great care!).

The mount points are in the same position relative to the centre of the PCB for
both variants.

### MX Adaptor

Alternatively, these PCBs can be used in conjunction with Kevin Eckert’s [Nav
Switch to MX Adapter][nav2mx]. The switch’s legs should be long enough to reach
past the bottom of the adaptor and through the mounting PCB. The switch’s legs
may need to be straightened for ease of soldering (be careful if doing this —
the fragility of these legs was one of the main prompts to create this board!).

For keyboards with a PCB, the adaptor can **only** be used top-mounted diodes
and the mounting board must be thinner than the usual 1.6mm to allow room for
the switch legs to be soldered[^3]. The legs will need to be trimmed back as
much as possible to avoid pressing on the keyboard PCB. There is not enough room
between a plate and a keyboard PCB for the adaptor and bottom-mounted diodes.

Careful consideration should be given to the order of assembly when using the
adaptor.


[^3]: At the time of writing 0.8mm PCBs seem to be available for no additional
      charge.


## Keycaps

Options for keycaps on navigation switches:

 * [Adafruit Black Rubber Joystick Nubbin Cap][ada-4697]
 * Kevin Eckert’s SA profile keycap for navigation switches is available
   alongside their [Nav Switch to MX Adapter][nav2mx] for mounting nav. switches
   in MX plates.
 * I have created three adaptors for attaching MX keycaps to navigation
   switches. The STL and glTF files can be found in the [*Adaptors*
   directory][adaptors], and the original models can be found by following the
   links to Tinkercad:
    * [Nav Switch to MX Stem Adaptor (PCB mount)][mx2navPCB] — this is for nav.
      switches that are mounted on the keyboard PCB. The top of the adaptor’s MX
      stem should line up with the stem tops of the MX switches. The length of
      the adaptor combined with the inherent wobbliness of 5-way switches may
      make this combination feel a little unstable.
    * [Nav Switch to MX Stem Adaptor (plate mount)][mx2navPlate] — this is for
      nav. switches that are mounted using the Nav Switch to MX Adapter
      mentioned above and is the shortest non-destructive adaptor. However, the
      adapted keycaps will be higher than those of surrounding MX switches, and
      because of the thin connection between the nav. switch sleeve and the MX
      cross stem, this can be a little fragile.
    * [Nav Switch to MX Keycap Adaptor (destructive)][mx2navDest] — this is
      probably the best option, *but* requires partially destroying a keycap!


[ALPS SKQUCAA010]: https://tech.alpsalpine.com/e/products/detail/SKQUCAA010/
[KiCad]: https://www.kicad.org
[Gerber format]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerber_format
[ada-504]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/504
[ada-4697]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/4697
[ali-SKQ]: https://www.aliexpress.com/w/wholesale-SKQUCAA010.html?catId=0&SearchText=SKQUCAA010&spm=a2g0o.productlist.1000002.0
[SOD-123]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_Outline_Diode
[keyboard matrix]: https://www.pcbheaven.com/wikipages/How_Key_Matrices_Works/
[nav2mx]: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:3958026
[adaptors]: https://github.com/bgkendall/nav-switch-mount/tree/main/Adaptors
[mx2navPCB]: https://www.tinkercad.com/things/bekaGf7odDx-nav-switch-to-mx-stem-adaptor-pcb-mount?sharecode=R3sgx1bJaI9IwZs5TYhDiTSV8UOKPbyqHVSEtGYQLDg
[mx2navPlate]: https://www.tinkercad.com/things/7jTtJ6HvAXj-nav-switch-to-mx-stem-adaptor-plate-mount?sharecode=IhC0T7EwBWF4NyNEA4Dhvkeg3NzzW6T-peJMX2NnrZU
[mx2navDest]: https://www.tinkercad.com/things/3gL4wvWRLj1-nav-switch-to-mx-keycap-adaptor-destructive?sharecode=r8TKDKdgjJ2txvJRraO-QcmJA2kGXZVvP2sOEYxu-jg
